Questions? Email the Skipper Director at skipper@scow.org Page 1 of 2
Revised January 23, 2023
Sailing Club of Washington Authorized Skipper
Agreement
IMPORTANT NOTE: By checking the “I have READ and UNDERSTAND and ACCEPT
the SCOW Skipper Agreement found HERE” box in your SCOW Member Profile, you
will be electronically signing this Agreement, confirming that you have read,
understand, and accept the Terms and Conditions of being a SCOW Authorized
Skipper, which shall apply in perpetuity any time you skipper a SCOW vessel.
The Sailing Club of Washington (SCOW) is a non-profit club, administered entirely through the volunteer efforts of its
members. SCOW maintains a fleet of sailboats for the use of its members who are certified and authorized to use these boats.
The boats are owned by SCOW and are maintained by the volunteer efforts of the Members.
As a SCOW Authorized Skipper, I agree to adhere to and abide by SCOW bylaws, policies and procedures including but not
limited to the SCOW Skipper Requirements and Boat Use Policy. I further agree to share in the responsibility and contribute
my time for the care and the upkeep of the SCOW boats, as well as for other SCOW activities. Accordingly, for the privilege of
skippering the SCOW boats, I verify completion of and/or agreement with the following:
I have successfully completed the written exam and the water check out for each type of boat for which I am applying.
Annually, on or before April 1, I agree to read the SCOW Skipper Requirements and Boat Use Policy, the Incident Reporting
Policy and the Skipper Information File (SIF) applicable to each type of boat for which I am certified. In preparation for the
sailing season, I will attend annual Rub Off The Rust (ROTR) events or review circulated ROTR materials applicable to each
type of boat for which I am certified.
I acknowledge that under Article IX of the bylaws, I may be disciplined for violation of Club policy, violation of State or
Federal maritime laws, destruction of or damage to Club property, injury to other individuals or behavior otherwise not
consistent with the purposes of the Club, in accordance with procedures established by the Board of Directors. I further
acknowledge that under Article IX, discipline may include the Board imposing sanctions including suspension of boat or other
membership privileges, suspension of membership, fines, reimbursement of costs to the Club, or expulsion from the Club.
I understand that furnishing date of birth and years of experience is required for club insurance purposes.
I previously have submitted, or am submitting, with this Authorized Skipper Agreement, an electronic copy of my NASBLAapproved Certificate of Boating Education/Safety.
Questions? Email the Skipper Director at skipper@scow.org Page 2 of 2
Revised January 23, 2023
If I am a cruiser skipper, I have submitted an electronic copy of proof of having procured a towing insurance policy and agree
to keep this policy or another towing insurance policy in force so long as I am an Authorized SCOW cruiser skipper.
I understand that the annual skipper fee is non-refundable, in whole or in part, whether this agreement is terminated by
SCOW or by me, and that I will not be entitled to or receive any rebate or refund.
I will participate in fleet maintenance activities for the type(s) of vessel for which I am skipper-certified.
I accept responsibility for the condition of the boat while the boat is in my custody. I will ensure that the boat is left in good
condition for the next skipper, including all equipment stowed correctly. I also will (i) follow the procedures in the Skipper
Requirements and Boat Use Policy if there is damage to the boat or equipment on the boat, and providing notice to
appropriate SCOW personnel and (ii) follow the Incident Reporting Policy, if required.
My use of any SCOW boat is additionally subject to the terms of the Membership Agreement, which I have separately signed.
While in command of any SCOW boat, I hereby assume liability for any and all loss(es), injury(ies), death or damage(s)
sustained by non-member guests or crew in the event such non-member guest or crew fails to sign the appropriate SCOW
waiver form.
I agree to always use a functional email address as my SCOW.ORG user ID. I further agree to stay fully
subscribed to ALL SCOW organization generated emails and to read all emails addressed to the SCOW skipper
community.