Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 1 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
AMENDED AND RESTATED BYLAWS
OF THE
SAILING CLUB OFWASHINGTON
PURPOSE
The corporation, is a nonprofit corporation incorporated in the District of Columbia as the Sailing Club of
Washington (hereinafter, the “Club”), shall provide its membership with opportunities to sail, to exchange
information about sailing, to learn safe boating procedures, and to meet others in the Potomac
River/Chesapeake Bay area with similar interests. The Club shall plan activities for both the novice and
experienced sailor.
ARTICLE I: OFFICES
The principal office of the Club shall be located in Washington, District of Columbia. The Club may
establish such other offices, either within or outside of the District of Columbia, as the Board of Directors
may designate, or as the business of the Club may require from time to time.
ARTICLE II: MEETINGS
Section 1. Annual Meetings. The Annual Meeting of the members shall be held on the second Monday in
November of each year for the purpose of electing officers and directors and for the transaction of such
other business as may come before the meeting. If the Board of Directors, hereinafter called the Board,
determines that the Annual Meeting should not be held on the date specified, it shall establish another date
and cause the meeting to be held at that time.
Section 2. Special Meetings. Special Meetings of the members for any purpose may be called by the
Commodore, by a majority of the Board, or by written petition to the Commodore, signed by ten (10)
percent
of the total membership entitled to vote at such meeting.
Section 3. General Meetings. General membership meetings will be held when scheduled by the Board.
Section 4. Notice of Meetings. Written or printed notice, stating the place, day, hour, and purpose of each
Annual or Special Meeting, shall be mailed or delivered to each member not less than ten (10) nor more
than thirty (30) days before the date of the meeting.
Section 5. Fixing Date of Record of Membership. The Board may set a date of record for determining
members entitled to notice of and to vote at an Annual or Special Meeting. Such date of record shall not be
more than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting in question. If no action is taken to set a date of record, the
date of record for voting shall be at midnight of the day preceding the meeting in question.
Section 6. Membership List. The Secretary shall make available, to any member who requests it, a true
and complete roster, including name and address, of each member entitled to vote.
Section 7. Quorum. Fifteen (15) percent of the entire membership entitled to vote, in person or by proxy,
shall constitute a quorum at an Annual or Special Meeting. At a General Meeting unless a majority of the
Board objects to a vote at the time of that vote, those members present in person and by proxy shall
constitute a quorum.
Section 8. Proxies. Except for votes under Article IV, Section 9, at all meetings of the members, a member
may vote by written proxy signed by the member, noting the specific item(s) for which the vote is to be
recorded. A member’s proxy may be voted only by another member present at the vote in question.
Section 9. Voting of Members. Each member shall be entitled to one vote on each matter submitted for a
vote at any meeting. A simple majority shall decide any issue. Commencing January 1, 2011, the Club will
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 2 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
utilize electronic/online voting or may use other methods deemed appropriate by the Board for Club
elections, annual meetings and special meetings. Paper ballots will be issued Club member(s) who request
paper ballots be sent to said member(s).
Section 10. Vote Inspectors. Two (2) or more vote inspectors may be elected by the members present at a
meeting, or, without objection by any member, may be appointed by the Commodore. The inspectors shall
open and close the polls, shall receive proxies, and shall decide all questions as to the standing of member,
the validity of proxies, and the acceptance or rejection of votes.
ARTICLE III: ELECTIONS
Section 1. Time and Place. The election of officers and directors shall be held each year at the Annual
Meeting by secret ballot. Polls will close thirty (30) minutes after the stated time for the meeting, unless
otherwise decided by the Board.
Section 2. Nominating Committee. Not less than sixty (60) days prior to each Annual Meeting, the Board
will appoint a Nominating Committee to prepare a list of nominees for election to the positions that will be
open for election at the Annual Meeting. The Committee will nominate at least one (1) candidate each for
the Officer positions of Commodore, Vice Commodore, Secretary, Treasurer, and at least one (1) candidate
each for the following seven (7) Director positions: (1) Training Director, (2) Skipper Certification
Director, (3) Social Activities Director, (4) Maintenance Director, (5) River/ Bay Activities Director, (6)
Racing Director and (7) Membership Director. The Nominating Committee report will be presented at the
regular Board Meeting and the regular General Meeting for the month preceding the Annual Meeting at
which the election is to take place. Additional nominations may be made from the floor by Club members
at the regular General Meeting preceding the Annual Meeting and, upon acceptance of a second, the
name(s) will be entered in nomination. Nominations will then be closed.
Section 3. Acceptance of Nomination. The Nominating Committee will contact each proposed candidate
to be certain of the candidate’s interest in the position and the candidate’s possible acceptance of the
nomination, should the committee decide to include the candidate’s name on the slate, before the ballot is
prepared. The Committee shall also contact members nominated from the floor at the meeting preceding
the Annual Meeting to determine their availability for office. These nominees, if available, are
automatically placed on the ballot. Candidates may run only for a single Officer or Director position and
the Nominating Committee shall identify the Officer or Director position for which each candidate is
running in its report and on the ballot.
Section 4. Procedures. The Board shall prescribe procedures to ensure secrecy and fairness of the election,
including provision for absentee balloting. The election procedures shall be provided to all members at
least twenty-five (25) days prior to the elections. The committee shall provide information about the
candidates and a ballot to all members at least ten (10) days before the Annual Meeting.
Section 5. Election Returns. A team of two (2) or more vote inspectors shall monitor the election, count
the secret ballots, and announce the results of the election at the Annual Meeting. For each Officer and
Director position on the ballot, the candidate for that position receiving the highest number of votes cast
shall be declared elected.
ARTICLE IV: OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Section 1. Officers and Directors. The Officers of the Club shall be a Commodore, a Vice Commodore, a
Secretary, and a Treasurer. The number of Directors shall be between ten (10) and twelve (12) and shall
include the duly elected Commodore, Vice Commodore, Secretary, and Treasurer and at least six additional
Directors with titles as follows: (1) Training Director, (2) Skipper Certification Director, (3) Social
Activities Director, (4) Maintenance Director, (5) River/Bay Activities Director, (6) Racing Director and
(7) Membership Director.
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 3 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
Section 2. Elections. The election of the Officers and Directors shall be at the Annual Meeting, as
presented in Article II and Article Ill. In the event that a quorum is not present for elections, the existing
Directors shall serve until such time as the election is held.
Section 3. Chairman, Organization. The Commodore shall be Chairman of the Board. The Commodore,
or, in the absence of the Commodore, the Vice Commodore; or in the absence of the Commodore and the
Vice Commodore, the Secretary; or, in the absence of the Commodore, the Vice Commodore and the
Secretary, the Treasurer; or in the absence of the Commodore, the Vice Commodore, the Secretary, and the
Treasurer, a member of the Board selected by the members present, shall preside at meetings of the Board.
The Secretary of the Club or an Assistant Secretary, as designated by the Commodore or other presiding
officer, shall act as Secretary and record the minutes of such meeting.
Section 4. Tenure. Each Director shall hold office from January 1 to December 31, following the date of
election or appointment, except as prescribed in Section 10 of this Article.
Section 5. Meetings. The Board may hold meetings at its discretion without notice to the Club
membership. All members of the Board must be given reasonable notification and opportunity to
participate in each meeting of the Board. For most purposes “reasonable notification” will be three (3)
calendar days. In situations of some urgency, this time limit may be reduced to one (1) calendar day. Any
member of the Club may attend a Board meeting as an observer and/or to address the Board regarding Club
business. Members wishing to address the Board should advise the Commodore (or other officer presiding
over the Club pursuant to Article V) in advance so that they may be placed on the agenda. Any or all of the
Directors may participate in a meeting of the Board or any committee thereof by conference telephone,
remote meeting software, or similar communications mechanisms by means of which all persons
participating in the meeting can hear each other.
Section 6. Action by Directors Without a Meeting. Unless otherwise restricted by the Certificate of
Incorporation or these Bylaws, any action required or permitted to be taken at any meeting of the Board, or
of any committee thereof, may be taken without a meeting if all members of the Board or of such
committee, as the case may be, consent thereto in writing, and the writing or writings are filed with the
minutes of proceedings of the Board or committee.
Section 7. Qualifications. In order to be elected or appointed as an Officer or Director, a candidate must be
a Club member in good standing.
Section 8. Quorum and Adjournment. A majority of the number of Directors fixed by Section 1 of this
Article shall constitute a quorum for a Board meeting. Except for votes under Article IV, Section 10,
Board members may vote by proxy and the proxy shall be counted as part of the quorum necessary to
conduct business. The proxy shall be delivered in writing to the Commodore (or other officer presiding
over the Club pursuant to Article V) in advance of the meeting specifying the Board member authorized to
vote the proxy and shall be entered into the minutes of the meeting. If Board business must be conducted
between regular meetings, the Commodore (or other officer presiding over the Club pursuant to Article V)
may conduct such business by telephone or electronic mail poll, with such votes recorded in the minutes of
the next regular Board meeting. Except for actions taken under Section 10 of this Article, any action taken
by a majority vote of the members of the Board present shall constitute an action taken by the entire Board,
unless a written dissent is entered into the minutes of the meeting at which the action was taken. In the
event of such a dissent, no official action may be taken until a full quorum is present. Whether or not a
quorum is present to conduct a meeting, any meeting of the Board (including an adjourned meeting) may
be adjourned by a majority of the Directors present, to reconvene at a specific time and place. It shall not be
necessary to give to the Directors present at the adjourned meeting notice of the reconvened meeting or of
the business to be transacted, other than by announcement at the meeting that was adjourned; provided,
however, that notice of such reconvened meeting, stating the date, time, and place of the reconvened
meeting, shall be given to the Directors not present at the adjourned meeting in accordance with the
requirements of Section 6 hereof.
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 4 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
Section 9. Resignations and Vacancies. Any Officer or Director may resign at any time by giving written
notice to any member of the Board or the Secretary. Unless otherwise stated in such notice of resignation,
the acceptance thereof shall not be necessary to make it effective; and such resignation shall take effect at
the time specified therein or, in the absence of such specification, it shall take effect upon the receipt
thereof. Any vacancy occurring in any Officer or Director position will be filled by appointment of a
qualified Club member by the remaining members of the Board within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of
the vacancy. In the event of simultaneous vacancies in the offices of Commodore and Vice Commodore, or
in the absence or disability of both, the Board of Directors shall choose an Acting Commodore within thirty
(30) days. An Officer or Director so appointed shall serve the unexpired term of the predecessor, unless
removed from office as prescribed in Section 10 of this Article.
Section 10. Removal. An Officer or Director of the Board may be removed with or without cause by a two
thirds (2/3) majority of all of the members of the Board entitled to vote generally in the election of
directors. Any officer appointed by another officer may be removed with or without cause by such officer.
Section 11. Compensation. No salary shall be paid to the Officers or Directors of the Club, nor shall they
receive any fee or travel money for attending Board meetings. However, subject to the restrictions in
Article VII, Section 5, they shall be reimbursed from the Treasury of the Club for properly receipted
advances made in its behalf by them, for properly approved travel other than to and from Board meetings,
and for other properly receipted personal expenses necessarily incurred in exercising their responsibilities
of office, subject to the restrictions in Article VII, Section 5.
Section 12. Manner of Acting. Except as otherwise provided in the Certificate of Incorporation, these
Bylaws and the laws of the District of Columbia, all actions taken by the Board shall be taken by a majority
vote of the members then in office. The act of the majority of the Directors present at a meeting at which a
quorum is present shall be the act of the Board. Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board
may be taken without a meeting if all the members of the board consent, in writing, to the action and the
consents are filed with the minutes of the meetings.
Section 13. Presumption of Assent. A Director of the Club who is present at a meeting of the Board at
which action on any corporate matter is taken shall be presumed to have assented to action being taken on
such matter unless he or she files a written dissent to such action with the person acting as the Secretary of
the meeting the meeting before the adjournment thereof, or shall forward such dissent by registered mail to
the Secretary of the Club immediately after the adjournment of the meeting. Such right to dissent shall not
apply to a Director who voted in favor of such action.
Section 14. Indemnification. The Directors, officers and former Directors or Officers shall be indemnified
by the Club against expenses actually and reasonably incurred by that person in connection with the
defense of any action, suit or proceeding, civil or criminal, in which that person is made a party by reason
of being or having been a Director or officer of the Club, except in relation to matters in which that person
was adjudged, in the action, suit or proceeding, to be liable for gross negligence or misconduct in the
performance of corporate duties.
Section 15. Execution of Instruments. Checks, notes, drafts, other commercial instruments, assignments,
guarantees of signatures and contracts (except as otherwise provided herein or by law) shall be executed by
the Commodore, Vice Commodore, Treasurer, Secretary or such officers or employees or agents as the
Board or any of such designated officers may direct.
Section 16. Mechanical Endorsement. The Commodore, Vice Commodore, Treasurer or Secretary may
authorize any endorsement on behalf of the Club to be made by such mechanical means or stamps as any of
such officers may deem appropriate.
ARTICLE V: DUTIES AND POWERS OF OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS
Section 1. General Powers. The following business and affairs of the club can be exercised by the general
membership only at the Annual Meeting or at a Special Meeting called for that purpose: election of officers 
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 5 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
under Article III; removal of officers; voting on changes in fees, dues and assessments under Article VIII,
Section 5; and voting on the form of the corporate seal under Article X. All other business and affairs of the
Club shall be managed by its Board of Directors, which shall establish the policies and procedures for Club
operations. The Officers shall carry out the policies and procedures established by the Board. The policies
and procedures duly established by the Board shall remain in effect until repealed, revised, or superseded
by a newly adopted policy or procedure. A brief description of existing policies and procedures adopted by
the Board, along with the date of their adoption, shall be published each year in the Membership Directory.
Section 2. Commodore. The Commodore shall be the principal executive officer of the Club and, subject
to the control of the Board, shall supervise and control all of the business and affairs of the Club. The
Commodore shall preside at all meetings of the membership and of the Board. The Commodore may sign,
with any one of other Officer, any deeds, contracts, and other instruments that the Board has authorized.
The Commodore shall have the authority to appoint program coordinators, committee members or advisors
to the Club or Board to support the conduct of Club business.
Section 3. Vice Commodore. In the absence of the Commodore or in the event of the Commodore’s
inability or refusal to act, the Vice Commodore shall perform the duties of the Commodore, and, when so
acting, shall have all the powers of and be subject to all the restrictions on the Commodore. The Vice
Commodore shall be an ex officio member of all committees that shall be established by the board or
Commodore. The Vice Commodore shall perform such other duties as from time to time may be assigned
to him or her by the Commodore or the Board. To provide continuity in club affairs, the Vice Commodore
would be expected in the normal course of events to be nominated as a candidate for election to the position
of Commodore in the following year; however, this expectation would not prevent the Vice Commodore
from declining such nomination or preclude others from also standing for election as Commodore.
Section 4. Secretary. In the temporary absence of the Commodore and Vice Commodore, the Secretary
shall perform the duties of the Commodore, and, when so acting, shall have all the powers of and be subject
to all the restrictions on the Commodore. The Secretary shall (a) keep the minutes of all business transacted
at Club and Board meetings; (b) provide each new member with a copy of these Bylaws at the time the
member first joins the Club and a replacement copy each time the Bylaws are revised; (c) see that all
notices are duty given in accordance with the provisions of these Bylaws; (d) be custodian of the Club
records; (e) keep a current register of the name, address and telephone numbers of each Club member; (f)
have general charge of the membership books of the Club; and (g) perform all duties incident to the office
of Secretary and such other duties as from time to time may be assigned by the Commodore or the Board.
Section 5. Treasurer. In the temporary absence of the Commodore, Vice Commodore, and Secretary, the
Treasurer shall perform the duties of the Commodore, and, when so acting, shall have all the powers of and
be subject to all the restrictions on the Commodore. The Treasurer shall (a) have charge and custody of and
be responsible for all funds of the Club; (b) receive and give receipts for money due and payable to the
Club from any source, and deposit all such money in the name of the Club in such banks and other
depositories approved by the Boards; (c) be custodian of the Incorporation Seal of the Club, and see that the
seal is affixed to all documents authorized by the Club or Board; and (d) perform all duties incident to the
office of Treasurer and such other duties as from time to time may be assigned by the Commodore or the
Board. The Board shall obtain bond or other surety for the Treasurer.
Section 6. Succession. If both the Commodore and Vice Commodore are unable or unwilling to act, the
position of Commodore shall be filled according to the procedures specified in Article IV, Sections 9 and
10.
Section 7. Directors The Directors elected pursuant to Article III, Section 2 shall have the following
general duties:
(1) Training Director: responsible for organizing the Club’s training programs;
(2) Skipper Certification Director: responsible for ensuring that skippers who use the club’s boats are
properly checked out and qualified;
(3) Social Activities Director: responsible for organizing the club’s social events;
(4) Maintenance Director: responsible for organizing the maintenance of the club’s boats;
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 6 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
(5) River/Bay Activities Director: responsible for organizing activities for members on the
Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay;
(6) Racing Director: responsible for organizing the Club’s racing program; and
(7) Membership Director: oversees recruitment and retention of membership.
The Commodore may assign the Directors such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the affairs
and programs of the club. With the approval of the Board, the Commodore may appoint up to two
additional Directors as required to carry out new programs or other duties for which the Commodore deems
Board membership to be appropriate. Also, with the approval of the Board, the Commodore may reassign
Director responsibilities.
Section 8. Additional Duties of Officers, Directors or Coordinators. Each Officer, Director or
Coordinator shall maintain an inventory of SCOW equipment utilized in their area of responsibility, and a
“pass down” book to consist of SCOW procedures and policies, a current position description, schedules or
timelines followed in the past, planning forms, training materials, contracts and other records pertinent to
their area of responsibility. The inventory list and “pass down” book shall be updated by the outgoing
Officer, Director or Coordinator to reflect dispositions and additions of equipment, and changes in
procedures, policies, schedules or forms during the current year, and delivered to the newly elected
Commodore for distribution to the appropriate Officer, Director or Coordinator following the November
elections.
ARTICLE VI: COMMITTEES
Section 1. Nominating Committee. The Nominating Committee shall consist of at least five (5) Club
members. The term “Club members” as used in this article shall mean members of SCOW in good
standing. Its composition shall include at least one (1) past Commodore, if available; one (1) member of the
Board; and one (1) non-Board Club member. Its duties are defined in Article III.
Section 2. Boat Asset Committee. The Boat Asset Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall
consist of a minimum of six (6) Club members, including the current Director responsible for maintenance
and at least one other member of the Board and two (2) Club members who are boat owners. Its duties shall
include planning for the utilization of and recommending acquisition of boats for Club use to the Board and
the general membership. The Boat Asset Committee shall use a professionally licensed marine surveyor to
conduct a full and proper marine survey of any new or used boat to be purchased if such boat is twenty (20)
feet or longer in length overall (LOA) measurement. Such survey shall be conducted with the boat hauled
from the water as well as in the water for purposes of detailed hull inspection and include a rigging
inspection aloft. A proper written report of this marine survey shall be required of said surveyor for review
by the Committee and the Board before final purchase of the boat. The Boat Asset Committee shall inspect
all club boats at least semi-annually to ensure that all required safety equipment is available and in working
condition and shall ensure that the Director assigned to oversee maintenance inspects the boats for safety
on an ongoing basis. The Boat Asset Committee annually shall provide to the Commodore and incoming
Board a report on the status of club boats with recommendations for the following year.
Section 3. Audit Committee. The Audit Committee shall be composed of Club member(s) other than the
current Treasurer or the Treasurer from the year being audited.
Section 4. Training and Skipper Certification Committee. A Training and Skipper Certification
Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall consist of a minimum of five (5) Club members,
including at least one past Training Director (if available). In addition, the current Training Director and the
Director or Coordinator of Skipper Certification shall be members ex officio. The Committee shall advise
and assist the Training Director and the Skipper Coordinator with respect to the establishment of standards
and procedures for training and skipper certification, and the planning and implementation of their
responsibilities. The Committee shall ensure that standards and procedures for training and skipper
certification promote safety and safe boating skills, as well as compliance with any applicable laws or
regulations. The Training and Skipper Certification Committee shall also give advice and assistance to the
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 7 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
Directors responsible for Training and Skipper Certification with respect to the establishment of standards
and procedures for appointment and removal of trainers and check-out skippers. Annually, these
Directors shall present to the Board a list of trainers and check-out skippers who satisfy these standards for
approval by the Board. These Directors may also recommend that the Board remove such trainers or
checkout skippers from the approved list. No person shall be authorized to skipper the club's boats unless
he or she has shown evidence of completing a safe boating course or test approved by the National
Association of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA)
Section 5. Investment Committee. SCOW shall have an Investment committee that shall manage the
investment assets of the club. The Investment Committee shall oversee investment research and analysis
(whether conducted by a member of SCOW or an investment adviser or an investment firm) and shall
recommend to the Board how Club assets are to be invested for consideration. The Board is not bound by
the Committee's recommendation and may, in its discretion, approve or disapprove the investment, in
whole or part. The Investment Committee shall develop and maintain an investment strategy with the goal
of achieving the maximum rate of return on investments, while minimizing risk. The investment of Club
assets shall comply with the SCOW Investment Policy currently approved by the Board. The investment
Committee shall submit a written report to the Board each quarter on the status of Club investments.
The Investment Committee shall be composed of no more than five members. Members of the Investment
Committee shall be members of SCOW in good standing. The SCOW Commodore and SCOW Treasurer
shall each be a member of the Investment Committee. If available and a member in good standing, the
immediate past Treasurer of SCOW shall be a member of the Investment Committee. The Commodore
shall recommend and the Board shall approve other members of the Investment Committee in accordance
with the provisions of Article VI, Section 5.
Section 6. Other Committees and Positions. The Board may create itself, or empower the Commodore to
create, such positions or committees as may be desirable to carry out the program and affairs of the club.
The Board or Commodore shall define the duties of such positions or committees and shall appoint and/or
remove the member(s) to fill them. The Commodore may assign an Officer or Director to oversee the
activities of such positions or committees.
ARTICLE VII: CONTRACTS AND FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES
Section 1. Contracts. The Board may authorize and/or withdraw authorization from any Board member to
enter into any contract or execute and deliver any instrument in the name of the Club. No Club member
shall enter any contract or make any expenditure on behalf of the Club without specific authorization of the
Board. Such authorization may be general or confined to specific instances. Debt may be incurred only for
periods not to exceed ninety (90) days, and only for the purposes of paying operating expenses.
Section 2. Budget. The Board shall approve the annual budget no later than the February Board meeting of
each year, and published in the SCOW newsletter no later than April. A mid-year review of the budget
shall be held and the budget adjusted accordingly. If the Board fails to enact a budget, the actual operating
receipts and expenditures from the prior year shall be the budget. No later than the December Board
meeting, the outgoing Board shall prepare a draft budget proposal for the following year, with supporting
details relative to proposed income and expenditure items, to be delivered for consideration by the newly
elected Board. Establishment of the annual budget, either through Board approval or, by reverting to the
prior year in the event of failure by the Board to enact a budget, shall constitute authorization for the
responsible person (Board Member, Coordinator or Chairperson, as indicated by the budget as passed by
the Board) to expend funds in accordance with the annual budget. Such expenditure shall be within the
scope of each responsible person’s area of responsibility and shall not exceed the budgeted amount
approved by the board except as described in section 5, below.
Section 3. Checks, Drafts, Etc. All checks, drafts or other orders for payment of money, notes, or other
evidences of indebtedness issued in the name of the Club shall be signed by any two (2) of the Board
authorized signatures for amounts greater than $500; any one signature shall suffice for amounts less than
or equal to $500.
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 8 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
Section 4. Deposits. All Club funds, not otherwise employed, shall be deposited within thirty (30) days of
receipt to the credit of the Club in such federally-insured banks or depositories as the Treasurer may select
and the Board has approved.
Section 5. General Expenditures. Establishment of the annual budget under section 2 of this Article
constitutes authorization for the responsible Board member, Coordinator or Chairperson (“responsible
person” as defined in Article VII, section 2) to obligate and/or expend funds in accordance with the purpose
for which the budget allocation was made and subject to remaining within the total amount allocated in the
budget. During any calendar year, a responsible person may not obligate a total amount above their
approved budget allocation without further consultation with the Board. Any additional budget allocation in
excess of the budgeted amount for the calendar year must be approved in advance by a majority vote of the
Board. Such approval may be obtained by a telephone or e-mail poll of the Board or remote meeting such
as Zoom, conducted by an officer during which reasonable attempts must be made to contact all Board
Members, and a majority of Board Members approve the obligation. If the responsible person does not
obtain such approval in advance, that person may request that the obligation be ratified at the next Board
meeting after the obligation is incurred. However, the individual requesting such “after the fact” approval
must recognize that some or all of the obligation may not be ratified and that the individual will not be
reimbursed should that be the case. Member requests to the Treasurer for reimbursement of expenses must
have been authorized in advance by the responsible person and be accompanied by appropriate receipts.
Absent such approval and supporting documentation, it must be recognized that some or all of the
obligation may not be reimbursed.
Section 6. Boat Asset Fund. The Board shall establish a Boat Asset Fund. The funds shall be maintained
in a separate bank account from the Club’s general account and all interest shall accrue to the Boat Asset
Fund. Any use of these funds other than for boat-related capital expenditures shall require the approval of
the membership at a Special Meeting. A minimum of nine (9) percent of the annual gross receipts of the
Club from training fees, skipper fees and membership dues shall be transferred to the Boat Asset Fund each
year, however, the Board may transfer a larger amount should the Club's financial situation warrant. The
sale proceeds of any boat-related capital asset shall be deposited to the Boat Asset Fund.
Section 7. Reserve Fund. The Board shall establish and maintain a reserve fund equal in amount to the
total fixed expenditures (e.g., insurance, slip fees, rents, service of debt, etc.) that are projected for the then
current year budget. This reserve fund shall be maintained to ensure the financial viability of the club in
case total disbursements in any year has significantly exceeded budgeted levels. The reserve fund is
intended to allow the club to pay its fixed costs and ensure continuity of operations in the year following
the overrun until such time as the general fund is restored to balance. Withdrawals from the Reserve Fund
may be authorized only by the Board after notice to the general membership and a plan for restoration of
the Reserve Fund and balancing of the general fund shall be announced to the membership at time
withdrawal is made. At or before the December meeting each year, the outgoing Board will establish the
dollar amount of the Reserve Fund based on the fixed expenses for the current year, and this amount will be
passed on to the incoming Board in the Reserve Fund. The Board shall budget and plan its annual expenses
to ensure that adequate operating funds will remain in the club’s accounts at the end of the year so that the
succeeding Board will not have to make use of the Reserve Fund.
Section 8. Audit. The Club accounts shall be audited annually and a written audit report prepared by the
Audit Committee. A summary of this report shall be published in the SCOW newsletter.
ARTICLE VIII: MEMBERSHIP
Section 1. Eligibility. All persons 18 years of age or older interested in sailing are eligible for membership.
Memberships may be offered on an individual or household basis. If the Club offers household
memberships, only persons in the household 18 years of age or older may be members.
Section 2. Application. Each applicant for membership shall sign a Membership Agreement, including a
waiver of claims against the Club, its officers, directors, members and agents, in such form as the Board
may prescribe. The Membership Agreement and waiver shall thereafter bind the applicant in perpetuity 
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 9 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
while participating in sailing or any other activities conducted by the Club, unless terminated by the
applicant or the Club. For a household application, each person over 18 must sign the Membership
Agreement and waiver. A parent or legal guardian may sign the Membership Agreement and waiver on
behalf of persons between 5 and 17 years of age residing in that household. Membership Agreements may
be signed electronically.
Section 3. Membership and Shareholders. Each applicant who is current in payment of dues, assessments
and debt to the Club is a member of the club and a shareholder, without financial interest in the Club.
Section 4. Responsibilities. Members of the Club shall abide by the rules, policies, and Bylaws of the
Club. While aboard vessels of the Club, members shall obey the commands of the person in charge of the
vessel. All members shall help maintain the Club’s boats and assist with other Club functions.
Section 5. Fees, Dues, and Assessments. Members are liable for fees, dues and assessments that shall be
established by the Board from time to time. Any fee, dues, or assessment set by the Board may be reduced,
increased, or canceled by a majority vote of all members voting, in person or by proxy, at a Special
Meeting of the members.
Section 6. Financial Delinquency. The Club shall provide notice to any member who is sixty (60) days in
arrears of any assessment, dues, or debt owed the Club.
Section 7. Tenure and Transferability. Membership in the Club is not transferable, and it shall absolutely
cease and terminate when the member dies, resigns, or is expelled from membership.
ARTICLE IX: DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
Section 1. Grounds. The Board, either on its own motion or upon the written complaint of any Club
member accompanied by justification, may consider disciplining a member for cause, such as violation of
Club policy, violation of State or Federal maritime laws, destruction of or damage to Club property, injury
to other individuals or behavior otherwise not consistent with the purposes of the Club.
Section 2. Procedures. Procedures shall be established by the Board and distributed to all members. If the
Board resolves to consider a complaint, the Secretary shall schedule a meeting to review the complaint and
shall notify the person(s) about whom the complaint has been made not less than ten (10) days prior to the
meeting, of the time and place of the meeting.
Section 3. Sanctions. The Board may impose sanctions including suspension of boat or other membership
privileges, suspension of membership, fines, reimbursement of costs to the Club, or expulsion from the
Club. Expulsion shall require a two thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Board. Lesser sanctions shall require a
majority vote.
ARTICLE X: SEAL
The Board shall provide a Corporate Seal that shall be in a form voted on by Club members and in
accordance with the designated specifications for a Seal of Incorporation in the District of Columbia.
ARTICLE XI: WAIVER OF NOTICE
Whenever any notice is required to be given to any member or Director of the Club under the provisions of
the Bylaws or under provisions of the Articles of Incorporation, a waiver thereof in writing, signed by the
person or persons entitled to such notices, whether before or after the time stated therein, shall be deemed
equivalent to the giving of such notice.
ARTICLE XII: PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 10 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
The most recent edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the Club, unless
inconsistent with these Bylaws.
ARTICLE XIII: AMENDMENTS
These Bylaws may be altered, amended, or repealed, and new Bylaws adopted by a majority vote of all
members voting, in person or by proxy, at any Annual, Special, or General Meeting, when the proposed
amendment and notice of the time and place of the meeting have been submitted in writing to the
membership at least (10) days and not more than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting. The current Bylaws
shall be published annually in the Membership Directory.
ARTICLE XIV: INDEMNIFICATION
Section 1. Indemnification provisions in Certificate of Incorporation. The provisions of this Article
XIV are intended to supplement the Certificate of Incorporation pursuant. To the extent that this Article
XIV contains any provisions inconsistent therewith, the provisions of the Certificate of Incorporation shall
govern. Terms defined in the Certificate of Incorporation shall have the same meaning in this Article XIV.
Section 2. Undertakings for Advances of Expenses. If and to the extent the Code requires, an
advancement by the Club of expenses incurred by an indemnitee pursuant to the certificate of Incorporation
(hereinafter an "advancement of expenses") shall be made only upon delivery to the Club of an undertaking
(hereinafter an "undertaking"), by or on behalf of such indemnitee, to repay all amounts so advanced if it
shall ultimately· be determined by final judicial decision from which there is no further right to appeal
(hereinafter a "final adjudication") that such indemnitee is not entitled to be indemnified for such expenses
under the certificate of Incorporation or otherwise.
Section 3. Claims for Indemnification. If a claim for indemnification under the Certificate of
Incorporation is not paid in full by the Club within sixty (60) days after it has been received in writing by
the Club, except in the case of a claim for an advancement of expenses, in which case the applicable period
shall be twenty days, the indemnitee may at any time thereafter bring suit against the Club to recover the
unpaid amount of the claim. If successful in whole or in part in any such suit, or in a suit brought by the
Club to recover an advancement of expenses pursuant to the terms of an undertaking, the indemnitee shall
be entitled to be paid also the expense of prosecuting or defending such suit. In any suit brought by the
indemnitee to enforce a right to indemnification hereunder (but not in a suit brought by the indemnitee to
enforce a right to an advancement of expenses) it shall be a defense that, and in any suit by the Club to
recover an advancement of expenses pursuant to the terms of an undertaking, the Club shall be entitled to
recover such expenses only upon a final adjudication that, the indemnitee has not met the applicable
standard of conduct set forth in the District of Columbia Nonprofit Corporation Act (the “Act”) (or any
successor provision or provisions thereto). Neither the failure of the Club (including the Board or
independent legal counselor) to have made a determination prior to the commencement of such suit that
indemnification of the indemnitee is proper in the circumstances because the indemnitee has met the
applicable standard of conduct set forth in the Act (or any successor provision or provisions), nor an actual
determination by the Club (including the Board or independent legal counsel) that the indemnitee has not
met such applicable standard of conduct, shall create a presumption that the indemnitee has not met the
applicable standard of conduct or, in the case of such a suit brought by the indemnitee, be a defense to such
suit. In any suit brought by the indemnitee to enforce a right to indemnification or to an advancement of
expenses hereunder, or by the Club to recover an advancement of expenses pursuant to the terms of an
undertaking, the burden of proving that the indemnitee is not entitled to be indemnified, or to have or retain
such advancement of expenses, under the certificate of Incorporation or this Article V or otherwise, shall be
on the Club.
Section 4. Insurance. The Club may maintain insurance, at its expense, to protect itself and any Director,
trustee, officer, employee or agent of the Club or another enterprise against any expense, liability or loss,
whether or not the Club would have the power to indemnify such person against such expense, liability or
loss under the Act.
Sailing Club of Washington Bylaws Page 11 of 11
Amended February 6, 2023
Section 5. Severability. In the event that any of the provisions of this Article XIV (including any provision
within a single section, paragraph or sentence) is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
void or otherwise unenforceable, the remaining provisions are severable and shall remain enforceable to the
full extent permitted by law.
(As Amended at Annual Membership Meeting November 09, 2020)